# TTP Full Stack Bootcamp
## Session 6: The terminal, npm, react part 1, material ui, and pair programming

---

# Review

1. How does JS interact with HTML?
2. How does HTML interact with JS?

---

# What is the terminal?

The terminal is a way to control a machine without having any graphical or visual feedback. It is done entirely with your keyboard.

---

# Why is it important?

- No graphical interface means less hardware demands and means you can do more with cheaper hardware
- No graphical interface means less bandwidth needed
- Considered 'pro' and more options are open. **warning** fewer protections are in place and you can easily make a catastrophic failure.
- More efficiency. Commands are often much faster to type out than using the mouse. The availability of scripts also magnifies this.

If you ever want to do any backend development, you need to be familiar with the terminal. Some backend developers work exclusively from the terminal (and some frontend devs too!)

---

# Example

## The slides and diagrams for all of class so far have been made straight from the terminal!

---

# Intro to Terminal Commands

- `ls` list the contents of the current directory you're in
- `pwd` check what directory you're currently in

`ls` and `pwd` are great sanity checks, just like `git status` and `git check`. They verify that you and the machine are on the same page.

- `clear` removes previous output from the terminal command
- `cd [directory]` moves you into the stated directory
- `cd ..` moves you upward from your current directory
- `cd ~` jump to your home directory, regardless of where you are

---

# Quick Live Demo

---

# Running Programs from the Terminal

- `emacs` you can call some programs with just their name
- `emacs README.md` some programs will take args following their name
- `emacs -q` sometimes you can pass args using short flags
- `emacs --no-splash` sometimes you can pass args using long flags
- `tar -czf` sometimes you can specify multiple short flags at the same time. This is equivalent to running `tar -c -z -f` 

Almost all programs have a `--help` or `-h` flag to learn more on what optins are available to you.

---

# Starting with React Boilerplate

A boilerplate in code is a preset package that has everything already set up. It is designed to meet the most basic, common needs for developers and serves as a launching off point for further work. It's useful for beginners because it can handle any complicated setups; for experts, it just saves time. React luckily has a boilerplate generator! *Boilerplate code is sometimes called bootstrapped.*

```
npx create-react-app my-app
cd my-app
npm start
```


---

# What is React?

React is a JS library built by Facebook to build create powerful user interfaces easily. It is intelligently designed so that parts of the webpage can change as needed without reloading the entire page, leading to snappy response times.

React is a pretty dense concept to get through, so we will be spending the next few classes on it. There may be some or many parts of it you don't understand; these will get taught in due time. However, the most powerful tool in learning is seeing a live product, so some concepts will be glossed over for now so that we can still observe our concepts live.

---

# Why is it important?

- React produces a single page app (SPA), which is far faster than traditional webpage models.
- React has a vast developer community, meaning it's easier to find support and libraries.
- React developers are in higher demand in the job market. According to [educative.io](https://www.educative.io/blog/react-angular-vue-comparison) in 2020, the number of job postings on Indeed.com heavily favored React developers:
    - React: **42k**
    - Angular: **10k**
    - Vue: **3k**

---

# React runs on JSX

JSX is a combination of JS and HTML syntax that we've come to know and love last week. Here's some examples:

```
let name = `${last_name}, ${first_name}`;
return (
	<p>
		Hello {name}!
	</p>
)
```

---

# The Anatomy of a JSX page

``` {style="font-size: 10pt"}
import React from 'react';
// other imports

class YOUR_COMPONENT extends React.Component{
	// other member functions and variables can go here

	render(){
		// JS code goes here
		// but not _all_ your code
		const name = 'Jon Chin';
		
		return(
			// JSX / HTML  goes here
			<p>hello {name}</p>
		)
	}
}

export default YOUR_COMPONENT
```

---

# Key React Concepts

- **Variable Interpolation**  
In JSX, JS-like expressions such as variables can be wrapped in `{}`. This signals to the interpreter that whatever is inside should be treated as JS. The result will be converted to HTML.

- **Live Reloading**  
When we executed `npm start`, we spun up a local server as well as a long-running script that *watches* our source code. Any time a file changes, the script kicks in again and re-compiles our code. This makes development **far** faster.

---

# Packages and NPM

Much like how we used external libraries with HTML and CSS, we can borrow code from other developers, called packages. Sometimes, these packages can be as small as 50 lines and created by an indie developer. Sometimes, they can be 1,000s of lines and created by an organization like Google. One is just as crucial as the other, since packages can *depend* on other packages.

The Share Meals App, which is relatively simple, depends on 1,200+ other packages.

---

# How do we load external packages?

`npm` is the node package manager and makes it incredibly easy for us to use other packages. It's executed like this:

`npm install package-1 package-2 --save`

This does 3 things:

1. adds the package (and dependencies) in your `node_modules` directory
2. lists the package (and dependencies) in your `package.json` file
3. saves the specific version of package (and dependencies) in your `package-lock.json` file

---

# Making portable projects

Since you could conceivable use 1,000s of packages in your project that are publicly available to everyone, it is often best practice to not commit your `node_modules` directory to git. Instead, committing `package.json` and `package-lock.json` will allow any developer to exactly recreate your package dependencies, saving time and space.

To prevent files from being tracked by git, you can put a `.gitignore` file in the root of your project. This file is useful for preventing other things, such as caches and sensitive passwords, from being committed as well.

---

# Quick Review

What are the following:

1. The terminal
2. Short flag
3. Boilerplate or bootstrapped code
4. SPA
5. JSX
6. Live Reloading
7. Packages (in context of JS)
8. NPM
9. .gitignore

---

# Using the Material UI Package

Material UI is the React version of Google's Material Design philosophy. We were introduced to this before withe Materialize, which is the CSS version. Their syntax is similar and the transfer of knowledge should be relatively easy. We can begin installation:

`npm install material-ui --save`

*(For full installation, we need to include other things but we'll skip that for now. Full instructions on installation are available [here](https://material-ui.com/getting-started/installation/), if you are curious.)*

---

# Comparison of Materialize and Material UI

```
<div class="row">
	<div class="col s12">
		item 1
	</div>
	<div class="col s6">
		item 2
	</div>
	<div class="col s6 m8">
		item 3
	</div>
</div>
```

{.column}

```
<Grid container>
	<Grid item xs={12}>
		item 1
	</Grid>
	<Grid item xs={6}>
		item 2
	</Grid>
	<Grid item xs={6} sm={8}>
		item 3
	</Grid>
</Grid>
```

---

# JSX and HTML

As you can see in the previous example, JSX uses HTML tag-like syntax. In JSX, you can define your own tags, while HTML is limited to those defined in the HTML5 revision. However, you can *also* use HTML in JSX:

``` {style="font-size: 14pt"}
<Grid container>
	<Grid item xs={12}>
		<h1>Alert!</h1>
		<p>
			Access Denied
		</p>
	</Grid>
</Grid>
```

---

# Finally, Live Demo

We'll be using off the shelf components from Material UI

[https://material-ui.com/](https://material-ui.com/)
