# TTP Full Stack Bootcamp
## Session 7: react components, state vs props, react router

---

# Review

Define the following:

1. The terminal
2. Long flag
3. Boilerplate or bootstrapped code
4. SPA
5. React
6. JSX
7. Packages (in context of JS)
8.`package.json`
9. NPM

---

# React Components

Everything in React is a component. Components are reusable logical blocks of code that have a specific purpose. Components can contain variables, functions, and other components that it needs to achieve that purpose.

If you're familiar with object oriented programming, components are basically objects. Specifically in JS, they are called classes. In the context of our bootcamp, you can think of components as custom HTML tags, except much more powerful.

---

# Accessing with the Component Scope

Since everything within a component is bundled together, a special keyword `this` is provided to access other variables and functions within the component. The `this` scope is persistent throughout all parts, so modifying it in one of the component's function will affect them all. We'll see an example of this shortly.

---

# Props and State

In addition to standard JS variables, a React Component has access to 2 special objects: `props` and `state`, which are referenced using `this.props` and `this.state`.

Since components can be included inside any other component, they are sometimes given data from their parent to control how they behave. This data is stored in `this.props` and is treated as a `const`.

Sometimes, a component also needs to manage data in order to operate; however, its parent doesn't really need to know the specifics. This is stored in `this.state`. **Note**: state variables cannot be directly modified and must instead be modified through `this.setState()`.

---

# Props and State Analogy

Let's say Elvis is working for MEC and he needs a company car. We can give him one but the only one available is a blue Honda Civic. Elvis uses the car over the next few months and has to do upkeep it, including filling the gas tank and rotating the tires.

Which variables here are analogous to `state` and which to `props`? Which variables can Elvis control and which can he not?

---

# this.setState()

A component's state is stored as an object, which each variable represented by a property. When updating, you may not want to change every variable, only a few. `this.setstate()` will perform an intelligent comparison between the object you pass and the current state, updating and/or adding properties as needed.

---

# this.setState() Example

``` {style="font-size: 12pt"}
constructor(){
	this.state = {
		first_name: 'Theodore',
		last_name: 'Roosevelt'
	}
}

fix_name(){
	this.setState({
		first_name: 'Franklin',
		middle_name: 'D'
	}
	// what is the value of this.state?
}
```

---

# Anatomy of a Component

There are 2 ways to create components: as a function and as a class. We'll be using the class definition in this bootcamp to have better control over the component's `lifecycle`. A `lifecycle` is a series of stages that a component moves through, from start to end, as it is being used. With the class definition, there are a few special member functions, although we will only focus on 2:

A component will usually have a `constructor()` although if one is not provided, a simple default one is used instead. The `constructor()` only gets called once in the component's `lifecycle` and sets things up, including establishing the `state`. This is the only place where you can use `this.state = {}`.

A component must have a `render()` that is responsible for putting together the final HTML that will be presented on the screen. Every time something changes within the component, its `render()` is called again. For efficiency;s sake, only write code that is relevant to display here.

---

# Example of Component render() Logic

``` {style="font-size: 9pt"}
constructor(props){
	super(props);
	this.state = {
		personal_data: {}
	};
	this.fetchData();
}
fetchData(){
	// make call to external api
	this.setState({
		personal_data: return_from_api
	});
}
render(){
	// NOT this.fetchData();
	const name = this.state.first_name + ' ' + this.state.last_name;
	return(
		<p>{name}</p>
	);
}
```

---

# Using Other Components

Whether you are using a component from an external library or one that you've created yourself, the process is exactly the same:

1. Import it first. If you are using a custom made component, you will need a `relative path`
2. Use HTML like syntax to call it in your `render()`. You can use either an explicit closing tag or an empty tag.  
**note** Any HTML5 tags you use will still require closing tags if needed.

---

# Basic Example of using Components

``` {style="font-size: 10pt"}
import React from 'react';
import Button from '@material-ui/core/Button';
import Header from './components/Header';

class App extends React.Component{
	render(){
		return(
			<>
				<Header />
				<Button>
					Send Email
				</Button>
			</>
		);
	}
}

export default App;
```

---

# Real Life Example

[Project Outline](https://github.com/useStable/code-exercise)  
[Code](https://gitlab.com/jon.chin/stable-demo)

---

# React Router

[https://reactrouter.com/web/guides/quick-start](https://reactrouter.com/web/guides/quick-start)

---

# Live Coding Demo

---
