# TTP Full Stack Bootcamp
## Session 10: APIs, SDKs, and Async Calls

---

# Review

1. When should you trust the user?
2. What is a picker? Why is it used?
3. Why do we often need to call `event.preventDefault()`?

---

# API Calls

You will often want to use another company's services and/or data when creating your own apps. This could be to retrieve the latest stock prices or to provide Google Maps to your user or to translate text that your user has entered. The standard way to do this is via an API call.

API stands for Application Program Interface and is a way to externally access a 3rd party set of functions and data. They are often accessed via a REST call; for our purposes, we can think of this as a specially formed URL.

---

# Access

APIs will usually require authorized access. If it is a paid service, the 3rd party will want to track your usage to update your bill. If it is a free service, they will still want to track your usage to detect potential abuse or unfair usage. Sometimes an API will not require authorized access, but this is rare.

Authorization takes the form of an API key, a long string of characters that uniquely identifies you. By default, you should treat these the same as you would passwords: keep them safe and don't leak them out. **When committing code to git, you should make sure no API keys are included!** You can accomplish this using your .gitignore file. However, your API key will sometimes need to be made public (eg with most Google services), so you will have to commit them.

---

# Costs

If you are working with a paid or freemium API, you always want to be careful about racking up your bill. This is especially true during a project's development phase when you'll be doing a lot of testing; this is also true if you are still learning how to make API calls. Some common precautions:

- Include a `limit` in your calls
- Work on a small dataset for development
- Have a separate account for development vs production
- Where available, use the API's sandbox environment

The **worst** thing is to wake up the next morning, realize your script is still running, and face a $1,000 bill.

---

# REST calls and SDKs

Nearly every API will be accessible via a REST call. These can get pretty complex and unwieldy so some have developed Software Development Kits (SDK) to make it easier to generate calls. When working in React, you want to look for a JS SDK.

Otherwise, a popular package to generate raw REST calls is [axios](https://github.com/axios/axios). Where possible, I suggest using an SDK.

---

# Async calls

You are probably most familiar with `synchronous function calls`. This is also called `blocking`, in that a function call will *block* the thread of execution until it completes. However, when making external API calls, there are a lot of variables that we cannot control:

- the quality/speed of the user's internet connection
- the size of this particular user's particular call
- the quality of the 3rd party's API server
- the number of concurrent requests the 3rd party's API server is getting at this particular time


---

# Promises

In short, we have no way to predict how long an API call will take. This has given rise to the development of `asynchronous calls`.

In JS / Node, this uncertainty is fixed by the use of `promises`. These run in a separate execution thread that will either be successful and return to the main thread or fail and return to the main thread.

To determine what code to execute when a `promise` completes / fails, we pass a `callback function` as an argument when creating it. Promises are built-in objects within JS / Node that are often characterized by `.then()` and `.catch()`.

---

# Promise Example

```
this.geocodeRecords()
	.then((results) => {
		console.log('success!');
	})
	.catch((error) => {
		console.log(`error: ${error.message}`);
	});

```

---

# Async calls with UI/UX

Users are impatient. They will click the **Pay** button multiple times. They will refresh the page multiple times and trigger your API calls again. They are the worst.

Good UI/UX will prevent further unintended interaction, usually through `disabled` buttons / forms. It will also provide some sort of busy indicator, like a spinner or loading bar. In Material UI, the various `Progress` components are used for visual feedback.

---

# Further Reading

For more in depth information about promises, callbacks, asynchronous execution, and `async`/`await` syntax:

[https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_callback.asp](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_callback.asp)  
[https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Asynchronous/Introducing](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Asynchronous/Introducing)

---

# Pause for Questions

---

# Code Dissection

---

# Live Coding Demo

