# TTP Full Stack Bootcamp
## Session 11: Deploying React Apps, Backend Dev: NodeJS, Heroku, Express

---

# Review

1. What is the most important thing to remember about API keys? Why is that important to know?
2. What is a REST call? Why are they important?
3. Users are (a) the best or (b) the worts? Why?
4. What are some good UI/UX practices when dealing with asynchronous functions?
5. What is an SDK? Why is it important?
6. In computer science, what is a non blocking function? How is that relevant to our work?
7. What are some variables about a 3rd party API call that we cannot control?

---

# Overview for the rest of Bootcamp

We have accomplished an amazing amount of learning in the last 2 weeks. While we have been putting this into practice through the form of assignments, the full culmination of our learning is the capstone project. As such, we will be focusing purely on them for the rest of the bootcamp.

However, we still want to experience full stack development and so far we've mainly focused on frontend work. We'll balance this out by doing backend lessons this morning and tomorrow morning on server administration and database administration respectively. There will be no assignments for these lessons; you're also not *required* to incorporate these skills into your capstone project but if you are able to, your project will be much more impressive.

---

# Quick Tutorial: Deploying via Netlify

As we build full React apps, we will eventually want to publish them on the web. Running `npm start` is meant as a development tool and not for final publication.

There are several ways to do this but I vastly prefer Netlify. It integrates with GitHub, GitLab, and Bitbucket, all the major git hosting services. It's main competitive advantage over something like GitHub Pages is that Netlify allows you to host private repositories completely for free.

Let's do a quick demo: [https://www.netlify.com/](https://www.netlify.com/)

---

# Continuous Integration / Continuous Delivery

Deploying to Netlify (or similar) closes the loop on an important software engineering practice called Continuous Integration / Continuous Delivery (CI/CD). We've been practicing CI all bootcamp: completing small changes to a code base, putting it through a review process, then merging it into the main codebase. Since this is happening all the time, even after the product has already shipped, it's called Continuous Integration.

Netlify can be configured to listen for changes on a repo, even on a specific branch, build it and, if successful, publish the changes. Therefore, the user can get instant access to your changes, hence Continuous Delivery.

---

# What is Backend Development?

**Frontend**

Client side code executes on an individual user's machine / device  
Must account for user behavior  
Error checking and security is mainly improves quality of life for user

{.column}

**Backend**

Server side code executes on a centralized machine that handles many clients  
Must account for scalability  
Error checking and security is a must and servers are often last line of defense

---

# What is NodeJS?

NodeJS is a server side runtime environment for JS, allowing it to run outside of a browser. Once free from browser restrictions, NodeJS gains access to much more powerful libraries that traditionally were only available through languages like Java and PHP.

Since NodeJS is based on JS, you already know how to code it! Congrats, you're a backend dev! Let's look at some examples.

---

# Notable Differences between NodeJS and JS

1. Since NodeJS is decoupled from the browser, it loses access to things like the DOM (global document variable) and `alert()`;
2. NodeJS uses the `require()` syntax to use external libraries. Starting with v12, NodeJS has some support for `import()` and `export()` syntax.
3. With clever use of tools like `cron`, NodeJS can be executed without a user being present.

---

# What is ExpressJS?

A practical application of NodeJS is ExpressJS, a replacement for traditional web server technologies like Apache and Tomcat, 16 and 12 years older than ExpressJS respectively. ExpressJS is a highly minimalist web server, making it easy to develop and debug.

Some companies that use ExpressJS include IBM, Uber, and Fox Sports.

---

# The Essential CRUD Interface 1/2

Web servers often expose a connection to a database and therefore need to have endpoints (ie routes) that allow clients to interact with that database. This boils down to 4 essential operations:

- **C**reate: add new data to the server
- **R**ead: retrieve existing data from the server
- **U**pdate: change existing data on the server
- **D**elete: remove existing data from the server

---

# The Essential CRUD Interface 2/2

These roughly correlate with HTTP methods first developed in 1991: GET, POST, PUT, HEAD, OPTIONS, and DELETE. In practical terms, GET and POST methods are used most often. This is why you'll often see `.get()` and `.post()` in ExpressJS apps.

For today, since we don't have a database set up (that's tomorrow!), we will only be focusing on **r**ead and GET methods.

---

# Deployment via Heroku

The power of running an ExpressJS server is best appreciated when it's deployed to a public server. There are several ways to do this; a free and fairly popular way is through Heroku.

Heroku is a Platform as a Service (PaaS) that allows us to deploy modern apps. It is fully managed so all the nitty gritty of maintaining a server is handled by them and we don't need to worry about it. For personal projects and proof of concepts, Heroku is free. The best part? It uses git for deployment. Here's how to use it:

[https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/getting-started-with-nodejs?singlepage=true](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/getting-started-with-nodejs?singlepage=true)

---

# Pause for Questions

---

# Live Coding Demo
