# TTP Full Stack Bootcamp
## Session 9: forms and basic validation

---

# Review

1. Using the React boilerplate code, how do you use external CSS files?
2. What is a conditional render?
3. What is fat arrow notation and why do we need it?
4. What is React Router and why do we need it?

---

# Forms

React apps generally have user interaction in the shape of forms. These receive information from the user beyond simple button clicks and can be fairly complex. For example, these can be login forms, sign up forms, chat boxes, file uploads, etc.

With what you know already, you should be able to layout the skeleton of a form using the Material UI components.

---

# Form Validation 1/2

**Be careful!** Users are never perfect and can often give you incorrect or corrupt data through forms. These can fall into 1 of 2 camps:

- Innocent mistakes. This is when the user has a spelling error or a misclick. These are small and unintentional but can signal that your app doesn't have clear instructions.
- Malicious mistakes. This is when the user is actively trying to do damage to your system, either by gaining access that they shouldn't have or intentionally sending corrupted data.

---

# Form Validation 2/2

It is general web security practice to always assume the worst: your user is trying to hack you. You should build several checks on both the frontend and backend to protect against this. On the frontend, this looks like:

- Use pickers where possible. These are specialized interfaces for selecting complicated data, such as timestamps, limiting their ability to enter knowingly malicious data instead.
- Perform form validation. This is a series of checks on inputs that catches incorrect data before it is sent to the server. Blocking its transmission and containing it to the user's machine is usually enough to stop malicious activity.

**Note**: frontend security measures alone are never enough. These are used as a convenience for users to make the UI/UX better. Security measures need to *also* be implemented on the backend.

---

# Code Dissection

[https://github.com/jonathan-chin/mec-ttp-2021-winter/tree/master/examples/form-validation](https://github.com/jonathan-chin/mec-ttp-2021-winter/tree/master/examples/form-validation)
