# TTP Full Stack Bootcamp
## Session 12: Databases

---

# Review

1. What is ExpressJS?
2. What does CRUD stand for? How is it relevant to our work?
3. What is Netlify?
4. What is Continuous Integration? Why is it important?
5. What is Continuous Delivery? Why is it important?
6. What are some key differences between frontend and backend development?

---

# Live Coding Demo
## SQLite on Heroku

---

# Advanced Topics in Databases

---

# WebSockets

There are use cases where asking a user to refresh their page (ie actively request updates) is not feasible. For a notification or chat system, useability greatly declines if updates are not received automatically. The best solution for this is a technology called WebSockets, which breaks the traditional client-server data model to include 2 way, realtime data transfer.

---

# Authentication

Once we start saving user data, we generally want to protect access to that data through authentication. Traditionally, this means a username / password credential, although there are other strategies like Single Sign On (SSO) and 2 factor authentication (2FA). SSO is when you use another trusted service like Google, GitHub, or Facebook to handle authentication for you. 2FA uses at least 2 different authentication methods; one example is username / password and access to a registered cell phone number.

SSO has been around for quite a long time and 2FA has recently become standard; although, simple username / password is still popular. It all depends on how *valuable* the data you are protecting is.

---

# Database and Backend as a Service

Implementing things like websockets and authentication can be time consuming, especially if you are using them across multiple projects. Maintenance can also be a burden if you don't have team members specifically trained and tasked to do so. This has given rise to Database and Backend as a Service (DBaaS and BaaS) companies. One such example is Google's Firebase:

[https://firebase.google.com/](https://firebase.google.com/)

---

# Database Paradigms

There are 2 primary categories of databases: SQL and NoSQL (also called relational and non relational). SQL like databases was first released in 1974 and still remains strong. Recently, MongoDB became popular and parts of the tech world started adopting NoSQL databases.

There are several nuances to the difference between SQL and NoSQL databases but SQL tends to be error resistant and NoSQL tends to be faster for development, especially in rapidly changing environments. It's not a hard and fast rule but older, larger companies tend to use SQL and newer startups tend to use NoSQL.
